---
title: "\"Writing an Interpreter in Go\" in Zig, part 5"
date: 2024-07-16T11:32
---

# "Writing an Interpreter in Go" in Zig, part 5

Introducting the AST, polymorphism in Zig, and starting the parser. This is
chapter 2, sections 2.1 through 2.5.

## AST and fat pointer polymorphism in Zig

Since Zig is barely more than C (in a good way), the language doesn't have
interfaces like Go, traits like Rust, or protocols like Swift: a mechanism
for runtime dynamic dispatch as well as compile-time membership (i.e., I want
to express a collection of items of possibly different underlying concrete
types that all implement a common set of methods).

With Zig's comptime and builtin functions, we can DIY whatever system we
like. The current vogue in Zig is a "fat pointer", where a structure represents
the interface type, and it has two fields: a pointer to the object implementing
the interface, and a pointer to the function implementation. This struct can
just be copied around as a value, since all we can about are those pointers.

For an AST, we're going to have a lot of struct types that represent the
various syntactic components of the language. These types are generally just
simple containers without much logic, a way to put names around pieces of
source tokens and carry around the tree structure built-up during parsing.

It's handy that this zoo of struct types each implement a common interface,
so that we can say, these are the set of AST objects, and we can combine and
compose them in as needed, treating them as opaque nodes in the tree. For
example, an if-statement will have a consequent block, which is a sequence
of statement nodes. We don't care how nestedly complex those statement nodes
are, they may be arbitrarily deep.

The core fat pointer pattern is something like:

```zig
const Node = struct {
    ptr: *anyopaque,
    fooFn: *const fn(*anyopaque) void,

    fn init(pointer: anytype): Node {
        // more to come ...
    }

    inline fn foo(node: Node) void {
        node.fooFn(node.ptr);
    }
};

const A = struct {
    fn foo(a: *A): void {
        std.debug.print("A\n", .{});
    }
};

const B = struct {
    fn foo(b: *B): void {
        std.debug.print("B\n", .{});
    }
};

test {
    var a: A = undefined;
    var b: B = undefined;
    const nodes = [_]Node{
        Node.init(&a),
        Node.init(&b),
    };
    for (nodes) |node| {
        node.foo();
    }
    // prints "A\n"
    // prints "B\n"
}
```

Types `A` and `B` both implement a `foo` function that has, other than the
pointer receiver first argument, an identical signature.

The `Node` type wraps a pointer of our implementing types, via the `init()`
functions. From there, we can call `foo()` directly, or whatever the interface
function is.

The trick to making this work is this bit of code in `Node.init()` that
I elided:

```zig
// ...
    fn init(pointer: anytype) Node {
        const Ptr = @TypeOf(pointer);
        assert(@typeInfo(Ptr) == .Pointer);
        assert(@typeInfo(Ptr).Pointer.size == .One);
        assert(@typeInfo(@typeInfo(Ptr).Pointer.child) == .Struct);

        const gen = struct {
            fn foo(ptr: *anyopaque) void {
                const self: Ptr = @ptrCast(@alignCast(ptr));
                @call(.always_inline, @typeInfo(Ptr).Pointer.child.foo, .{self});
            }
        };

        return .{
            .ptr = pointer,
            .fooFn = gen.foo,
        };
    }
// ...
```

First we use some comptime asserts that the passed-in object to be wrapped
is actually a pointer to a struct type.

Then we comptime-generate a wrapper function that casts the pointer to
the original underlying concrete type and calls the actual implementation
function, with the pointer as the receiver/first argument.

Finally, we return the Node struct with the wrapped pointer and wrapped
function call in place.
